In this lecture,
I'm going to review
some concepts portfolio theory.
Specifically, we're going to
talk about the portfolio
theory developed
by Markowitz in 1952
for which he was awarded
the Nobel Prize.
This is still the benchmark
portfolio theory
used in finance and taught
in finance classes.
Now, it has require
an approximation.
The approximation is that
returns are normally distributed.
In the last lecture, we talked
about how cryptocurrency returns
are definitely not
normally distributed.
However, the most
important insight from
this theory that
there are gains from
diversification
transcends the assumption
of normally distributed returns.
It's just a little
more complicated to do
this theory when returns are
not normally distributed.
I will then review the main
consequence of this theory,
which is the capital
asset pricing model.
So both are going to be very
useful in the results
that follow.
So here are the assumptions
of portfolio theory.
The first is that investors
prefer more to less,
the second is that investors are
risk averse, and finally,
strictly speaking, we do assume
the normal distribution
for returns.
Now, what this gives
us is that investors
care about the mean and
the standard deviation
of returns,
but they don't care about
higher order moments.
So what we want to
think about are
the trade-offs between means
and standard deviations,
and our basic tool
for thinking about
this trade-off is the mean
standard deviation diagram.
So consider this diagram,
there are two assets;
asset A and asset B.
Asset A and asset B are on
the same horizontal line.
That means that they have
the same expected return
or the same mean return.
However, notice that asset A
is plotted more to the
left than asset B.
That means that A has
a lower standard deviation
than asset B.
Now, we said that investors
prefer more to less
and are risk averse.
So A has the same mean as B,
but A has a lower
standard deviation.
What that means is
that A dominates B.
So according to our assumptions,
which is investors
prefer more to less,
they are risk averse and we
have a normal distribution,
every investor will
like A over B.
We don't really need
to know anything
else about their preferences.
So we say A dominates B.
Now, consider A and
C. A and C are on
the same vertical line,
but on different
horizontal lines.
This means, A and C have
the same standard
deviation namely;
the same level of risk,
but A has a higher
expected return.
So A dominates C. Again,
we don't need to
know anything about
investor preferences
other than what we
specified to say that
every investor is going to
prefer A to C. Now,
let's consider A,
B, and C together.
So if we compare B and C,
we will see that neither
dominates the other.
Some investors will prefer
B and some investors will prefer
C. An investor who
cares more about risks,
or is more risk
averse, will prefer C,
but the problem is, this investor
is going to get a lower return.
So the investor who prefers
B is still risk averse,
but can tolerate more risk,
that investor will be
rewarded with
a higher expected return.
Now, Markowitz showed that
if we take all the risky assets,
these lie inside of
what is a sideways U.
This sideways U is called
the risky asset frontier.
His point is that by combining
risky assets cleverly,
you can get to the top
part of the frontier,
that's called the efficient
frontier where you get
the best trade-off
between risk and return.
So let's think about the mean
standard deviation diagram.
Here we have the mean,
and here we have sigma for
the standard deviation.
So here's what Markowitz showed.
If you take a whole bunch
of risky assets,
each of these dots
represent a risky asset.
So notice that they are over
here there not over here,
which means that the
standard deviation is positive,
they have all different
standard deviations
and all different means.
Now, what you can
do is you can ask,
what is the lowest
standard deviation for any mean?
Now, if you ask that,
the answer to
that question traces
out a curve that looks like this.
So we can say all
right here's a mean,
what's the lowest possible
standard deviation?
It's this point right here.
Well, here's a mean,
what's the lowest possible
standard deviation?
Well, it's this point right here.
So this curve here is called
the minimum variance frontier.
Now, what's a frontier?
A frontier is the
farthest you could go,
like the Western frontier or
space the final frontier.
Well, here, notice
there's nothing beyond
the minimum variance frontier
all the portfolios are
within the frontier.
Now, there's a special
part of the frontier.
This part, that's where
investors want to be,
because there's a higher mean
given the standard deviation,
and that part is called
the efficient frontier.
Now, we're still talking
about the case where there's
risky assets and
no riskless asset.
So what we're going to do
next is see what happens when
we add in something like
a treasury bill represented by
a point on the y-axis,
the risk-free rate.
Now let's introduce
a riskless asset
like a treasury bill.
The tangency line from the
riskless asset to the frontier
tells you the best possible
risky asset portfolio.
So consider this following graph.
So here we see mean on
the y-axis and standard
deviation on the x-axis.
We see the sideways U that
represents the frontier
of all the risky assets.
So all the risky assets lie
inside of the frontier and
the frontier represents
the minimum standard deviation
you can get for each mean.
Now, we put on the y-axis,
the risk-free rate and we draw
a tangency from the risk-free
rate to the frontier.
That tangency hits
the frontier at
one by definition and
that point we're
going to call it M,
we can call it M for mutual fund.
Now notice, that that line,
the line connecting
the risk-free rate to M that's
tangent to the risky
asset frontier
dominates every other
point in the space.
So for every point in the space
or however you much
risk you want,
you want to be on that line,
and that is the result for which
Markowitz won the Nobel Prize.
So the tangency portfolio,
the M, what's so
special about it?
Well, it has the
highest possible slope.
Any portfolio that has
a lower slope will be
sub-optimal, namely;
you can get a better mean for
the same level of risk by
going to the tangency
portfolio line.
Now, portfolios with a higher
slope would be wonderful,
but they cannot be
attained because you
need some connection to
the risky asset frontier.
So this slope, which is
the expected return minus
the risk-free rate divided by
the standard
deviation, has a name.
It's called the Sharpe
ratio after Bill Sharpe,
whom we're going to
discuss in a moment.
Now the line from
the risk-free rate to
the tangency portfolio is
called the capital
allocation line.
Just to review what makes
the capital allocation line so
special is its the line that
has the highest Sharpe ratio.
So the consequence
of this is something
called the mutual fund theorem.
What it means is that
the portfolio allocation problem
can be divided into two parts.
The first part is the same
for any investor and it
says you should determine
the tangency portfolio.
It's the optimal combination
of risky assets,
it's the mutual fund.
Then you determine based
on how risk averse you
are where you want to be on
the capital allocation line.
So if you're very risk averse,
you want to hold a little bit of
the mutual fund and a lot
of the risk-free asset.
If you're not as risk averse,
you might want to put
all your wealth in
the mutual fund then you'll
be at the tangency part.
If you're not that
risk averse at all,
you might even want to borrow and
invest the proceeds
in the mutual fund.
So that's the mutual
fund theorem.
Now, Bill Sharpe in the 1960s
realized an amazing consequence
of the mutual fund theorem.
If all investors hold
the same risky asset portfolio
than the market portfolio,
which is the weighted average
of everyone's portfolio,
is the best possible
portfolio, namely;
the market portfolio
is the tangency and
the market portfolio is
the efficient portfolio.
So in other words, you
don't even need to do
statistical analysis
to find the tangency,
you can find the tangency just by
looking at the market weights of
all assets relying on
the wisdom of crowds to have
found the tangency for you.
So what are the consequences
of this insight,
which is called the capital
asset pricing model?
Well, the first is that
the market portfolio,
the portfolio that holds
assets according to
their market weights,
is an efficient
portfolio, namely;
all investors should combine
the market portfolio
and the risk-free rate.
The second closely
related is that
the market portfolio has
the highest Sharpe
ratio possible.
Finally, and not so obviously,
but this would be taught
in a finance class,
expected returns on
assets are determined
by their betas with respect
to the market portfolio,
and they're determined by
the following equation
which is called the
security market line.
The expected return on
any asset is equal to
the risk-free rate
plus the beta times
the difference between
the expected return
on the market portfolio
on the risk-free rate.
Now, what's the beta?
The beta is the covariance
of the asset with
the market divided by
the variance of the market.
So where we're going with this
is we're going to
use these concepts
to describe how crypto
my function as part of
an optimal portfolio.